                                       
                                       
                                       
                 
                 
                 
                 
                 
                 
                 
                 
                 
                 
                 
                 
                 
                 
                 
                 
                 
                 
                 
                 
                 
                 
                 
                 
                 
                 
                 
                 
                 
                 
                                       
                apex anchor 88,000km??
                      or like 40-60km w 5kt weight                 
                          60 boeing 747s (designed for much lighter elevator probably)         
                                       
                                       
   how high is this?     Spaceport/    ▅
                       Counterweight   │
                                       │  
                                       │                                       
                                       │
                                       │  
                                       │
                                       │  
                                       │
                                       │  
                                       │
                                       │
                                       │                                       
                                       │                                           
                                       │                             
                                       │  │                                  
                                       │  │                            
                                       │  │                                         
                                       │  │              
                                       │  │           
                                       │  │                                       
 36,000km geostationary orbit          │<─┤         
                                       │  │          
                                       │  │         
                                       │  │         
                                       │  │          
                                       │  │
                                       │
                                       │  
                                       │
                                       │  
                                       │
                                       │
                                       │                                         
                                       │
                                       │  
                                       │  
                                       │
                                       │  
                                       │
                                       │ 
                                       │ 
                                       │ 
                                       │ 
                                       │ 
                                       │ 
                                       │       
 20,000km semi-synchronous orbit       │  
                                       │                         
                                       │ 
                                       │                         
                                       │              
                                       │                              
                                       │   
                                       │   
                                       │   
                                       │   
                                       │   
                                       │   
                                       │   
                                       │   
                                       │   
                                       │   
                                       │
                                       │
                                       │ 
                                       │
                                       │
                                   <-- │  
                                       │   
                                       │           
                                       │            
                                       │                       
                                       │
                                       │
 2000km Top of LEO                     │           
                                       │                                
 600km                                 │                           
 0km sea level                  __..---┴---..__      equator            
                            _,-'               `-._                             
                         ,-'                       `-.                          
                       ,'                             `.                         
                     ,'                                 `.                      
                    ;                                     :                     
                   /                                       \                    
                  /                                         \                   
                 ;                                           :                  
                 :                                           :                  
                 :                   n.pole                  :                  
                 :                                           :                  
                 :                                           ;                  
                  \                                         /                   
                   \                                       /                    
                    :                                     ;                     
                     `.                                 ,'                      
                       `.                             ,'                        
                         `-.                       ,-'                          
                            ``-.__           __.-''                             
                                  ``-------``       
                                  
                                                              
                                                                                
Earth height = 20 lines
Earth diameter = 12,714km
1 line = ~636km
Terminal_IV altitude = 35786 km; 56 lines


Rules to keep in mind to get space travel that feels like it belongs in this
setting, and rules to break to show that something doesn’t play by the
established rules Space travel is set up to be difficult and dangerous, to
enhance the pressure-cooker atmosphere of Terminal_IV. Getting out is a campaign
arc in and of itself. Your players may never set foot on a spaceship all
campaign long, but these suggestions should help maintain a consistent tone; of
course, you have our permission to break them any time you feel like it. 




The Zeroth Law: Infrastructure Gets It Done Space infrastructure projects are
what made space transit economical. Any time you get a chance to put an
elevator, skyhook, accelerator, laser highway etc on-screen, do so; delta-v is
expensive (see the First Law), so rely on infrastructure for your propulsion
wherever possible.  Terminal_IV is a love letter to space infrastructure, a
celebration of what can be done when humanity comes together, and a cautionary
tale about what happens when common goods are exploited for profit. Paint the
infrastructure as an enabler of progress, an arena of corporate greed, and a
means of accumulation and exploitation. Control of infrastructure = power
(omnipotent corporations like the Phobos Hook Company and Sun Macrosystems can
confirm).  *This law’s for free as it’s foundational to the entire premise of
the setting, a space station on a space elevator. We love space infrastructure.






The First Law: Delta-v Is Expensive Whatever means of propulsion you’re using,
in order to change velocity, you need some kind of thrust, and that thrust is
non-trivial to produce. Wherever you’re getting the energy from, whether it’s an
on-board fuel source or external, treat it like it’s precious.  This will mean
journeys take careful planning in advance; it may be advantageous to delay your
departure until your destination is in a good position (e.g. for a low-energy
Hohmann transfer); you’re likely not carrying much more fuel than is needed for
your mission plan as mass reduces efficiency; if you realise you forgot
something at the last spaceport it’s a huge pain to go back for it.  You’ll
likely want one means of propulsion optimised for high thrust (manoeuvre burns),
and another means of propulsion optimised for high specific impulse (efficient
long-distance acceleration). Even if you have access to high-energy-density fuel
sources like nuclear, ships in Terminal_IV can’t just go where they please. Get
your delta-v from infrastructure wherever possible (see the Zeroth Law).
Corollary: since delta-v is expensive, mass is too. Cargo and passengers cost
money. Don’t expect to be able to get passage on a ship for free, margins tend
to be tight.






The Second Law: See Travel In Terms Of Orbits And Gravity Wells You’re in orbit
when your ship’s velocity and the force of gravity pulling you towards an object
are balanced such that you continuously fall around the object instead of
falling into it or shooting off into space.  You’re almost always in orbit
around something (if you don’t think you’re orbiting anything, check if you’re
actually orbiting the Sun).  For a given radius from the centre of the object,
there’s a velocity at which the orbit is stable; the highest velocity orbit has
the lowest radius and vice-versa.  E.g. satellites in Low Earth Orbit like
Freestation Zarya travel at a higher velocity than Terminal_IV which is in a
higher (geostationary) orbit. They also complete more orbits in a day (16 vs 1).
The higher the radius, the weaker the pull of gravity. Higher-radius orbits are
considered “higher up the gravity well”, while lower-radius orbits are “lower
down”.  Somewhat counter-intuitively, you need to speed up to move to a higher
orbit, and slow down to move to a lower one.  To move to a higher orbit, burn
your engine to increase your velocity. You’re now moving faster than gravity can
pull you towards the object you’re orbiting, so you end up on an elliptical
transfer orbit taking you further away from the object than you were before.
Your velocity, temporarily increased by the burn, gradually decreases as you do
work to climb out of the gravity well. Despite the lower velocity, your ship has
more total energy as a result of the higher potential energy of the new orbit.
You may complete another burn at the furthest point (apogee) of the elliptical
orbit to circularise at a new orbit with a higher-radius and lower-velocity than
the original. It’s stable as even though you’re travelling slower, gravity is
weaker and you have further to fall.  To achieve the opposite effect and drop to
a lower orbit, burn your engines opposite your direction of travel to slow down.
Maybe you speed up so much you escape the gravity well altogether and go into
orbit around something else, or slow down so much you contact the thing you’re
orbiting.  When you move from one location in space to another, you’re putting
yourself into a transfer orbit; your origin and destination should be points on
that orbit.  E.g. departing from Terminal_IV in geostationary orbit and entering
a transfer orbit that will take you down to Freestation Zarya in Low Earth Orbit
is roughly the same process as departing Mars orbit and entering a transfer
orbit that will take you down to Earth orbit.  Changing velocity means expending
energy, which is expensive (see The First Law) so catch a lift up or down the
gravity well wherever you can (see The Zeroth Law). 

Orbit stuff is _weird_ but just remember you can’t increase or decrease speed
and keep the same orbit - to catch up to something you either need to go to a
higher orbit and wait for them to come back round or go down to a lower one,
overtake, and then burn back up to meet them


apoapsis/periapsis

burn radially/anti-radially




The Third Law: Space Is Big, Your Ships Are Slow Space is big[citation needed]
so everything’s very far away from everything else. Spaceships need to depart
well in advance of when they intend to arrive. Information only travels at the
speed of light, and ships travel much slower, so travel and trade are
characterised by lag.  Ships also need to be a certain size to fit in the life
support and propulsion requirements for that length of journey, so you’re
probably not doing interplanetary flight in a tiny two-seater transfer shuttle
(unless you’ve managed to accelerate it very fast indeed and have some way of
stopping at the other end (see The Seventh Law)).  Example travel times go here
- stations within Earth’s orbit like Kalpana Station, Freestation-Zarya;
interplanetary travel; far reaches of the solar system





The Fourth Law: Almost Nothing Does Re-entry Anymore The kinds of spaceships
which are efficient for interplanetary travel are not well-suited to the
business of atmospheric entry, and it’s not economical to use spaceships to move
mass up and down a gravity well when infrastructure is available (see the
Zeroth, First and Second Laws).  Generally, goods are transported up the gravity
well on elevators or skyhooks and then transshipped to continue their journey.
SSTO (Single Stage To Orbit) vehicles do exist, but are rare and generally used
for shuttling around high-paying personnel who want to skip the slow train ride
up the tether to orbit. Solar system bodies with weak gravity and little-to-no
atmosphere are routine to dock on for most kinds of spaceships, and the light
atmosphere and gravity of Mars see relatively frequent launches; the thick
atmosphere and strong gravity of Earth however make launches and landings there
a rare occurrence.






The Fifth Law: You Need Radiators Give your ship some damn radiators. Radiation
is like the only way to lose heat in space and your ship probably produces a lot
it needs to dissipate. The greater the radiators’ surface area, the better
they’ll dissipate the heat into the void.  They’re also beautiful if you
describe them right. More sci-fi should give ships radiators, for real. Be the
change you want to see and slap radiators on that ship. If you’re building a
stealth ship they won’t work though - see the bit of the book on stealth
steamers which use hydrogen/helium to cool their hull down to be undetectable
against background. 





The Sixth Law: Every Ship Is A Weapon Of Mass Destruction Authorities a) like to
know where every ship in the solar system is at all times and b) control who is
allowed to pilot those ships. Obviously the net has many holes: some places will
not recognise pilot accreditations from other places, some spaceports harbour
illegal and undocumented vessels, etc. Defence forces are all too happy to
intervene if you are behaving dangerously or erratically, and procuring a ship
legally is a difficult and long process.  Things in space move very fast, and
when even small pieces of debris collide with objects at orbital velocities bad
things happen. When it’s a whole spaceship acting as the impactor, even worse
things will happen (see The Seventh Law for a reminder of the importance of
being able to stop). Additionally, the line between “reactor” or “engine” and
“bomb” can be very blurred, and engine exhaust can be damaging in and of itself. 





The Seventh Law: Remember To Decelerate If you arrive at a destination without
decelerating first, you either become a weapon of mass destruction if you hit it
(see The Sixth Law) or can’t scrub enough speed to enter orbit and do an
embarrassing unplanned flyby. To avoid that, try to spend about half your
journey time accelerating, do a flip at the halfway point so you’re flying
backwards, and then use your main engines to decelerate back towards zero before
you arrive where you’re trying to go.  Coasting in the middle of the journey
rather than constantly accelerating will be slower but more fuel-efficient.
Unfortunately you will experience no gravity for the period you’re not running
the engine unless you have some kind of spin gravity setup (see The Eighth Law).
There’s not really much sense of direction in space so flying backwards isn’t
that weird.  If you decelerate too rapidly, for example by hitting something,
that’s probably fatal to all onboard for a number of different reasons.






The Eighth Law: You Get Gravity Only If You’re Spinning Or Under Thrust Magic
artificial gravity is banned, sorry. However, if your ship is arranged like a
skyscraper with vertically-stacked decks and the engines at the base, any time
you’re under constant linear acceleration of around 1g your characters can walk
around as on Earth.  You can assume this applies any time the engines are
providing thrust in a straight line, unless you’re accelerating aggressively, in
which case everything will feel much heavier than on Earth as if you’re in a
very fast lift.  If you’re not under thrust, you’ll need to spin the spaceship
to produce a fictitious force throwing you away from the spin axis, just like
how it works on Terminal_IV.  Some vessels’ habitable decks can swing so that
they can be arranged either perpendicular to the direction of travel while under
constant acceleration, or parallel to it to be spun up for spin gravity while
coasting. This is mostly only considered worth the extra mass of the mechanism
for extremely long journeys where accelerating the entire time is uneconomical
and the crew can’t just suck it up and deal with the weightless environment (see
The Ninth Law).





The Ninth Law: Interstellar Travel Is Its Own Weird Other Thing The first humans
are setting out to visit other stars. If you embark on such a journey, expect to
die en-route. Cryogenic suspension technology is in development, but it’s not
there yet. Interstellar is increasingly being seen as the next big opportunity
for expansion and profit now that the solar system has been extensively
colonised - but don’t let that trick you into thinking the solar system has been
in any way tamed (see The Tenth Law).






The Tenth Law: Space Is Dangerous While the dangers of hard vacuum are not
always as bad as you might think (the pressure differential between your
spaceship and the vacuum isn’t so great that small holes can cause the whole
vessel to explosively decompress or whatever, and you can survive hard vacuum
exposure for a few seconds to a minute just fine), many many things in space are
trying to kill you. Radiation, negative effects of microgravity, engineering
contracted out to the lowest bidder, etc. Paint spaceflight as inherently risky
and space itself as a threat.  Do not engage in space combat, it is not worth
it.  To repeat, it is absolutely NOT worth it. Everyone agrees that nothing good
can come of space combat and everyone tries to keep out of it as much as
possible. Having said that, almost all spaceships are armed to some extent and
if you do choose to engage in space combat, there is a section of this book full
of suggestions.




High-Thrust Transport Vehicle (HTTV)
   
  functional          .- ""      "" -.         "situation
  cargo block      .'                  '.      module"
                  /                      \     
  patterned      :                        :    Slaytheon's sitch
  after the     :                          :   module is intended
  21st-century  :         cryogenic        :   to provide high-
  Soviet FGB;   :         hydrogen         :   value transport
  built by      :                          :   vessles with 
  Roscosmos	:                          :   credible (on-paper)
  in the early	:                          :   defensive and
  21st century;  :                        ;    deterrence
  still in use    \                      /     capibilities.
  in the 2160s.   │/.                  .\│
  "ain't broke    │\/│'- _        _ -'│\/│     this one is           
  don't fix it,"  │/\│     \""""/     │/\│     configured with
  or a symptom    │\/│     /____\     │\/│     launch tubes for
  of an epoch     │/\│.- ""      "" -.│/\│     6 torpedoes (3
  of stagnation?  │\'                  '/│     configured as 
                  /                      \     interceptors, 3
		 :                        :    as ship-hunters)
		:                          :   and a "space-wiz"
		:                          :   CIWS autocannon
		:                          :   to put down    
		:                          :   point-defence
		:                          :   fire (though a 
		:                          :   lone gun provides
                 :                        ;    poor overall
		  \                      /     PDC coverage). 
                  │/.                  .\│
		  │\/│'- _        _ -'│\/│
                  │/\│     \""""/     │/\│













                        __//    \\__
                  _-""( )( )    ( )( )""-_
               .:""""""""""      """""""""":.
              //   pressurised cargo deck   \\    inflatable
             ::____________      ____________::   habitation
             ::                              ::   module
             ::       habitation deck        ::
	     ::____________      ____________::
             ::                              ;;
              \\      operations deck       //
               `.__________      __________:'
                  `'--- __        __ ---'`
	_____	          \\    //
  _"│├─┴─────┴─┬─┬─────o┐H ├────┤     .───====──oo──.    
┌" o│└─────────┘ └─────o┘┌*  __  *┬┬"'|   ====      |]\   ║║  CIWS
│__ │ .║ FGB ║"""" __:"  │  (  )  ││  |o  SLAYTHEON |]-o=(┌o┐ 
└_ o│┌─────────┐ ┌─────o┐└.  ""  .┴┴-.|   ====      |]/   └─┘ 
  "_│├─┬─────┬─┴─()()──o┘H └┬──┬┘     "───====──oo──"    
        """""              /____\  
                      .- ""      "" -.                   
                   .'                  '.              
                  /                      \     
                 :                        :                     
                :                          :                     
                :         cryogenic        :                   
                :         hydrogen         :                  
                :                          :                 
                :                          :                         
              	:                          :                
                 :                        ;                   
		  \                      /                    
                  │/.                  .\│
		  │\/│'- _        _ -'│\/│
                  │/\│     \""""/     │/\│
                  │\/│     /____\     │\/│
                  │/\│.- ""      "" -.│/\│
		  │\'                  '/│
                  /                      \
		 :                        :
		:                          :
		:                          :
		:                          :
		:                          :
		:                          :
		:                          :
                 :                        ;
		  \                      /
                   `.                  .'
		      '- _        _ -'      
                           \""""/
	         ┌──────────┤\/├──────────┐
		 │╬╬╬╬╬╬╬╬╬╬│/\│╬╬╬╬╬╬╬╬╬╬│
                 │╬╬╬╬╬╬╬╬╬╬│\/│╬╬╬╬╬╬╬╬╬╬│
	         └┬─────────┤/\├─────────┬┘
                  │╬╬╬╬╬╬╬╬╬│\/│╬╬╬╬╬╬╬╬╬│
                  │╬╬╬╬╬╬╬╬╬│/\│╬╬╬╬╬╬╬╬╬│
                  └┬────────┤\/├────────┬┘
	 	   │╬╬╬╬╬╬╬╬│/\│╬╬╬╬╬╬╬╬│
                   │╬╬╬╬╬╬╬╬│\/│╬╬╬╬╬╬╬╬│
 	           └┬───────┤/\├───────┬┘
                    │╬╬╬╬╬╬╬│\/│╬╬╬╬╬╬╬│
                    │╬╬╬╬╬╬╬│/\│╬╬╬╬╬╬╬│
                    └┬──────┤\/├──────┬┘
 		     │╬╬╬╬╬╬│/\│╬╬╬╬╬╬│
                     │╬╬╬╬╬╬│\/│╬╬╬╬╬╬│
		     └──────┤/\├──────┘
                            │\/│
                            │/\│
                            │\/│
                            │/\│
			   [├──┤]
                         __/│\/│\__
		       /( )"│/\│"( )\
                      [═╤╤══╧══╧══╤╤═]
	               [\\_/"\/"\_//] 
                       ││|||│─_│|||││ 
                       ││|||│─_│|||││ 
                      [││|||│─_│|||││]
		       ││/ \│─_│/ \││ 
	                \/ \_/\_/ \/  
                        "\ /""""\ /"
                         '/\]  [/\'
                         /__\  /__\
                        /____\/____\

 
